Welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
This podcast is presented to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe where a charity
then it powers users to control technology.
I'm Matthias Kirschner, the president of the Free Software Foundation Europe, and my
today's guest is Peter Uelson.
Peter is the project coordinator at a digital lab in Gothenburg, and I'm at Peter through
an exchange program by the Goethe Institute in Sweden, so they match the digital lab and
the FSFE and then cover the expenses that we could visit each other, and now Peter
spent the last days with other staffers and myself here in our Berlin office and had
time to learn from each other and think about some potential ways what we could do in
future.
And yes, I wanted to use this opportunity to talk with Peter about his work with Free
Software, his experiences with Free Software, so welcome, Peter.
Thank you so much, have a good day.
So Peter, before we go into the other questions and about your work, my question would be how
did you first encounter Free Software?
Yeah, yeah, just thought about this recently, I actually, the first time I started using
is I installed Linux on my computer around 2000, and it was after I'd seen Steve Ballmer,
I think it was the former CEO or at least, I mean the boss of Microsoft, he did a keynote,
he did a keynote speech on stage, I saw on TV, it was screaming and jumping up and down,
and I was like, no, I'm not gonna use Microsoft anymore, and I haven't since, I've cheated
with Apple, but I've never gone back to Microsoft, that's funny, I think you are the first person
who tells me that the reason for them to use Linux or not use Microsoft was the keynote
speech by Ballmer.
Okay, and yeah, so now at DigiDim Lab, you work with a DigiDim, and we also covered that
in our public money, public code brochure, and we wrote like, DigiDim is a participatory
democracy framework software that allows citizen to debate attend meetings and create proposals
with the goal of improving life in the city, but I'm quite sure that you could explain
us a little bit more what it means in practice, what you can do with that citizen.
Yeah, it's, I mean in practice is just a user-friendly web platform for setting up, like
it's a participation process, mainly for mainly aimed at cities, but like with DigiDim
Lab, we also work with some housing companies or, or, yeah, different like sections of cities
and so on.
So it's, so with, with Dacidim, you can, and you can in a sort of modular way design
citizen process in different stages.
So there might be like for us, we, we push, like, citizen participatory budgets a lot,
and then you have different phases of, of the citizens are able to, to write suggestions
on the platform, and then in the next step, someone, someone within the city is like going
through the suggestions to see, oh, is this legal, how much would each suggestion cost
and put a price tag on them and see if it's not, is it feasible, can we do this at all?
And then the next step, the citizens can, can vote for the suggestions that they like,
and that's how the, that's particularly part of the budget is done, distributed.
And there are also like, after something is, like, decided on Dacidim, you can follow
the process of implementation, which is a good thing for transparency also to see like,
oh, oh, we voted to improve this park and now it's been done to like 50% and these
other things that have been done and these things are left.
So it's, yeah, so, so you can sort of have a participatory process from start to end,
you know, in just a clear and user friendly way.
So on, on, on what level is, is that use, so there are suggestions by citizens and like,
is that then mainly like on a, on a city level or is it also used on a, on a higher level there?
And I mean, it's, it's, it was developed by Barcelona, city of Barcelona, to start with.
And it's being used in some, some regions and some national processes.
And we, we were also involved in using it for something called the future of Europe conferences
where they, they had the process of like citizen suggestions for the whole of EU where you can put
in suggestions and there was a process around it. So it's, I mean, it's, it can easily scale and
and I mean, we use it for like just smaller parts of the city, for example, space, but,
but for Barcelona, I mean, it's a few million people. So it's, so it kind of scales in
these different ways. I wouldn't use it for like a smaller association. I think that, like, that has to be like,
yeah, on, on some kind of medium scale to be worth using. But other than that, you can go like,
pretty far. But then I guess like, the most interesting things around citizen participation
has happened on a city level for the last, last six to eight years and something like that.
And with, with which public administrations did you work then in the past?
Like, right now in Sweden, we have like six decedent platforms running for, for a couple of areas
in Stockholm, Bootscheck and Jörg Holman. We have a city called Siktuna. We have a housing company
or two, two housing companies. And also the tenants association use it a bit. So, and then,
then in the past, we've also been involved in like international processes like this for the European
Union. And we worked with New York and Chicago in a consortium of other companies like mainly
French company called open source politics. We work with it not.
How is, how is that now working? Because I mean, if I remember correctly, you started as a
non-profit as a digital lab in Gothenburg. But I mean, meanwhile, when you talk about you have all
those different cities and parts of cities and other projects you're working on, you also
meanwhile have a cooperative there to organize like the economic part of this. But what other
players do you have about Dicidim at Dicidim development? Like, when it comes from Barcelona,
there are probably other people developing it from there. So, and then you said that there's
company then in France. Who else is participating here? I think they built like really
sort of interesting ecosystem around this. So, I mean, there's Barcelona, but they're also like,
they can still contribute a lot, but also when other cities start using it, like recently,
Helsinki in Finland, they've also been contributing back to the code. And then there are a lot
of smaller cities, of course, that don't have the resources to contribute. So, I mean, it's a good
sort of equalizing thing that the city has the resources they can put, they can put that into
development and yeah, just general improvements of features. And then there are around
30 sort of developing partners, which we are Dicidim lab, one of mainly like smaller companies,
some might be not profits too, I'm not entirely sure, but most of them like small medium-sized
companies that can work and do like local adjustments, because like for us, for example,
we might need a special kind of login system for Sweden, or there's a certain way of doing post
codes or whatever, so there's this kind of adjustment that makes sense to have a like at least
company in the same country. So, you have this core of 30 organizations who are contributing
on a regular basis to bring the software forward, and then around that you have
then other contributors on a case-by-case basis, or when they have resources to participate with.
Yeah, and I think that, I mean, I think it's an interesting model, and also the way that
like Barcelona, and I know that like Madrid worked a lot like that, actually like taking
a lot of input from the citizens, like how do we want this platform to improve. So let's sort of start
like sort of citizens perspective all the time too, which I think is great. So can you use Dicidim
to get new features for Dicidim? Yeah, it's funny to actually do this. They have something called
the Meta Dicidim installation, and they use this for suggesting new features, or this.
So you can comment and vote for suggesting new features. When you said before that, like for
example, then it's also used in Helsinki, and they participated there. Does that mean that they
Helsinki then actually had people from the public administrations themselves who contributed code,
or other contributions? Or did they contract companies to do this? Oh, I'm not entirely sure, but
yeah, I think they did both. I think they had some in-house work, and I mean, my impression is that
that's it is a good model to have some kind of in-house work from the cities to actually succeed
with these kind of things, like just also just to have someone to actually understand what is
happening even though they don't do a lot of the development themselves, to have like the in-house
sort of know-how about how to develop a platform and what kind of contractors to work and stuff
I mean, that's one of the big advantages. I also often promote for a free software that you can
use all kind of different models, and you can decide what kind of competency do we want with
in-house? What of the of my infrastructure is so important that we try everything to get to
developers of ourselves there, or at least people who understand this technology can therefore
take smarter decisions on whom to contract and how much to pay for certain features.
And in some other areas, you might say, well, not so important that we don't need someone directly
involved with something else. It's okay, we want to have one person always following the
development so that whatever happens, we don't have to stop letting people participate in our
processes. Yeah, I think it kind of creates a continuity and it also makes it safer in that you
know. I mean, that's also a thing I'm not relying on one particular provider with open source.
There's a lot of these things that make it more stable. For these kind of city platforms,
I mean, there's also always the risk that the progressive coalition of Barcelona is going to
lose the next election, and then the next city government might not be as interested in
platform as the previous one. So that's so I think like the way they've done it with having a
sort of multi-stakeholder development process is clever that way. And it said also something from
your experience that they are mainly then local providers, or is it also that people are interested,
and there is not so many local providers yet to provide the services that you then from Sweden
work with a public administration in some other European country, or how did that work?
So now is it mainly Swedish administrations or organizations you then work with, or is that
something which is easy for you to work with a public administration in Spain, for example.
I mean, we've really enjoyed doing the international work here, but I think we've always had
like someone on the ground like corporate wins and kind of local company or so on, because
just to have the knowledge of the sort of pure like processes, how those things work on a political
level and all of that, it's kind of, it's usually easier for someone with a local connection,
but then there are other things that there are like, I mean, we've been doing trainings in the
decedent platform and also like designing processes and how to combine decedent with physical
meetings and reach out, ways of reaching out and all the things like that sort of general
for every kind of process. I mean, a lot of the actual challenges, obviously some participation
are the same, but the bureaucracy behind it might be different. You said before one of the success
factors is that the city somehow has someone on their own or someone who they could trust with
a very good connection to them to actually implement that. What are the other success factors for
introducing a power-disappity platform for like a city? Yeah, I mean, there are a lot of
challenges and I think the ones that succeed are those that actually realize that yeah, this is
going to be a big task. This is not something that's just going to happen by itself. It's not enough
to just, it's not enough to just install a platform. I mean, what should we do? Build a new park,
close to the street. Yeah, successful. Yeah, so I mean, a lot of it is about trust and because
you might have had like participatory processes in a past that weren't actually that participatory
or nothing came out of it and then people lose trust in the process or like, especially if it's
more sort of poorer communities, they might have this like bad experience from dealing with
city officials in general. So I mean, outrage, communication and connecting to the local community
and local organizations and leaders and things like that to build up and kind of trust in the process
and maybe run it a couple of times so that people actually see that, oh, it had an impact like
something actually happened this time. So yeah, so that's a part also that you meant that it's not
let's make some suggestions, but that you can then also afterwards actually see this was then
implemented and how it was implemented. So people see it's not just about online discussions.
Yeah, and it's just it's not just one of these like suggesting boxes where you don't know where
where it's going to end up or if it even will end up somewhere. I mean, I could imagine when some
some people when they hear about that they should discuss with others on an online platform
about ideas for their city. They might somehow think about some of their worst experiences they
made on Facebook, Twitter and other such platforms. What was your experience there? I mean,
when you see all those those huge platforms and how much they they try to moderate or
yeah, they do the moderation there and they have lots of stuff doing that, but still
from my perspective, it often doesn't work at all and you have I mean also from from the
architecture of all of this it's it's built in a way that controversial things and that like
hatred and other things are are empowered there and are spread more widely. How is that on
on that seat and then how is the discussion happening there? Do you like when you introduce
that, do you then need to get five people moderating the processes or what's your experience there?
I mean, it's important to have a moderation, someone moderating discussion, but also like
I mean a lot of it is designed and the way that like Twitter, Facebook is it's actually
designed to create like maximum attention and and sort of divisions like this part of their
business model, whereas with with decedim it's been it's been sort of consciously designed to have
in to have a civil discussion and also be I mean the way that you need to be concrete in your
suggestions like you can you know you're you can't just come and say like oh I think this is about
this and that you need to be like oh how are we going to use this money to improve my local area?
and I guess like the connection to your local area, I mean you don't want to destroy that
I mean there might be stuff that you don't agree with but usually it's like oh should we put
money into making a football pitch? No I'm not interested in sports, I want like cultural
activities like that's that's more the kind of divisions you're going to get. But I mean I
could imagine that some discussions also could get quite heated yeah for example if you think about
should we close this street and just have this as like for for children playing or do we
a transfer this street into a bicycle street? So I mean is that then still civilized or then
other people getting into very heated discussions on the platforms? I mean from my experiences
you should live very civil and like but I think there's also a balance to think about like I mean
you do need places where people can vent issues that are important to them I mean you don't you don't
only create like a hateful environment but you also need like areas of like constructive
discussions and you need I think like one of the things that motivating me is that I think that
this kind of I mean opening up to this kind of more constructive discussions I believe could be
a way to to take like momentum away from these kind of parties that's just political parties
just about like people being upset and like blaming immigrants or whatever I don't know I think
there is a lot of like political energy that has to be directed in different in in more constructive
ways and and I mean unfortunately social media is doing it the completely wrong way but
we do need like places for for discussion and for discussing with people that we maybe
not meet in our daily life so yeah so I'm still I mean that's the hopeful view of
internet based discussion that you can still have a respectful discussion that you tolerate
yeah person yeah it sounds utopian when you look at like how many things function today but I think
I mean there is the least I can impossible one question I have is did you see any or where there any
any processes for the tools where you saw that this discussion isn't working like that in this
area and you have to change processes because you it's it's handled differently in this culture
do you experience something like that when when you work with different region when you saw that
like someone else was using the software and they said like that's not going to work for us we need
another we need to redesign this part for us because that's not how how people interact in other in
our region or in our city or yeah I mean like our our challenges often to get people to to participate
more like I think I mean and and to sort of also try to adjust this to make it easy to
to make a suggestion without creating an account for example or or like find ways to where you can
put down your suggestions easily on just a tablet or something in the street and yeah those kind of
leveraging those kind of pressures I think like for some of some of this came more natural in Spain
where they where it's I mean the platform and the people behind it it came out of this social
movement where there was like a big consensus on we want more democracy we want more transparency
and yeah so the engagement was already there anyway like so you say that when you go to the
north of Sweden then you can already be happy when you get a yeah yeah exactly okay yeah
and but I mean one one thing for me then is of like what what are some nice outcomes you you saw
there and why you think it's it's worth participating there I mean do you have two or three examples
what what came up in an inner process which was used on the with that CDM and then the city or the
region they they had something I thought like I really liked that yeah and yeah what have we got
I mean I know like on on a bigger scale in when I've done this in Madrid it's been like both
stuff like having a better coordinated system for the local transports you can use the same card
for everything within the city which you couldn't before that was one of the suggestions come up
and another thing was like in a more major to have to make like Madrid carbon neutral in in 20
years so they've started to and that was actually like decided on the on the digital platform
and they've started to make measurements for it to happen now Madrid does turn like
have a right wing okay government at the moment so that's kind of hold to the process a bit but
yeah there was like some some really interesting like major decisions coming out of of their
local of the digital platform and the process around it for for our part is more the kind of
stuff that we do for housing associations or local areas is more like yeah let's do this this
cultural trade or let's improve this football pitch or whatever but I mean it's still good stuff
it gets people a better connection to their area so often the small things which might have a
improvement for for life yeah hopefully oh okay then my last question about this it
would be like what larger challenges between like parts of getting citizen to participate in
their what what challenges do you see in general for the for the platform itself in comparison to
the proprietary environment around which is probably also trying to get some some parts there
yeah I think I mean I think there like things to be concerned about and it's I mean it's
extremely clear how different the just the business model around the proprietary software is
in Sweden like from like the stuff that I know it's so different like you almost always has this
kind of monopoly situation for each kind of platform like there are like two companies that
work together and make all the school platforms for Sweden and there was lots of
attention around this these guys in Stockholm were made their own open source platform but
so yeah so you have yeah because it's a small market and there's always there's some
and there's like an instant monopoly situation in an every kind of platform and yeah so my I mean
my concern would be that you would get this in sits and participation too or that I could have
a company that create maybe I shouldn't give them the idea but it's probably not listening
but say that they have a more sort of general platform for local authorities and then they just
make like the participation thing a plug-in so so it's easy to make it really easy for the local
authorities to start using this and things like this I mean whereas like with the open source
community we're a part of it's there's a natural cooperation between different companies different
cities so yeah I mean there's that on the other hand I mean I think like sits and participation
is a good example of I mean the advantages of free software and like because it's I mean it's
crucial that you can control what's actually happening as no one is manipulating the votes for
example and things like that and also because it it needs to be a platform that is like widely adopted
by as many people as possible the user interface and the user friendliness is super important so
so for us I mean even besides all the other points with free software it was so obvious that
that platforms like Destiny for example where Barcelona's already put in a lot of resources
into a platform they like weigh ahead of every proprietary platform just from a design perspective
so yeah so I mean there are tons of advantages it's just like the awareness about this
on a city level in small cities soft not there well let's see when people are listening
and they'll tell us what free software tools are already out there maybe that will make a difference
so we have to come to an end now but there's one question I'm asking every person whom I have as a
guest in our podcast and that is if there are any free software projects individuals out there
whom you would like to thank oh I mean I'm happy about the people who started this team
I maybe I should I worked with the Drupal for maybe eight years and made a living from that so thank
you to those people too yeah the console platform environment rate city environment rate
so it's also great so that's my main ones I think thank you Dan
Peter thank you very much for being here with me thank you so much and yes this was this episode
of the software freedom podcast the podcast is brought to you by the free software foundation europe
if you like the episode please subscribe to the podcast recommended to your friends
and then we will see each other again at the next episode bye bye
you